La dolce vita. The sweet life baby. The
parties, the drinking, the wild nights,
the love affairs. Because if we were
rich and beautiful with charming friends
and glittering spectacles every night,
we'd be happy. Right.
Right. Yes. I think we all know the
answer to this one. And so too does
Frederrico Fellini in his shocking
bitter masterpiece La Dolce Vita.
Because Fellini's film isn't about
seizing life or splashing away in
fountains. Some people misremember it as
a movie about enjoying every moment. But
oh no, that kind of film, it is not.
Instead, there's no happiness to be
found in the empty spectacle as our
anti-hero Marello Rubini discovers far
too late. He's trapped. And the film
leaves open the question of whether he
can ever escape. And Fellini's message
is pretty clear. If you're rich, if
you're beautiful and privileged and
attending the greatest parties, we will
burn you to the ground. So, in this
episode of Philosophical Film Club,
let's dive in to one of the greatest and
angriest films ever made. It asks us
four confronting philosophical
questions, namely, can we party through
a corrupt society while others suffer?
Can we find happiness in pure hedonism?
Or are we boring ourselves to death? Is
there an escape from meaninglessness and
nihilism? And can a film built of
scandal, celebrity, and tadloid shocks
still have a philosophically resonant
message for us today? We'll explore all
of these questions with help from Danish
philosopher Saurin Kyugore, the ghost of
Friedrich Ner, and a few other
existentialists piled into the back of
our philosophical sports car. Because if
there's one thing that Lulchce Vita
teaches us, it's this. Hell is being a
Kardashian.
[Music]
So, what is Lulce Vita about? Well, the
film opens with possibly the most absurd
shot ever to grace the start of an art
house film. It's a flying Jesus,
[Music]
or rather a helicopter flying to the
Vatican carrying both Jesus and the
protagonist of our film, the tabloid
journalist Marella Rubini, who
immediately tries to pick up some bikini
clad vixens on a rooftop pool. Now, some
pretentious academics will tell you that
the opening is an ingenious scene that
immediately references Rome's imperial
glory, its Christian past, and its
modern present, the pillars of Italian
identity, if you will. But really, it's
just the kind of surreal joke that
Fellini relishes. He was Montipython
before Python. And this opening tells us
two crucial things. First, we meet
Marello Rubini himself, who is something
of an existential anti-hero, a tabloid
journalist and a morally troubled
pleasure seeker. But second, it also
says that nothing is sacred. Not the
Vatican, not Jesus, not Roman high
society. Everything is up for dissection
by Fellini's ruthless gaze. And that
lavish high society, its money,
hypocrisies, aristocracies, its
privileges, its meaninglessness will
stand in for elites and oligarchs
everywhere, not just in Italy. The plot
itself unfolds as seven or so evenings
and dawns documenting different layers
of privileged, prosperous Rome. There's
the first night and a fancy nightclub.
We meet Marello again, bribing the mater
for gossip about Italian princes and
their escorts because he is a gossip
colonist documenting the high life while
yearning for a little taste of it
himself. He meets Melena. They pick up a
prostitute not for sex but to use her
room for an asignation and then returns
home at dawn to find his fiance has
tried to commit suicide. Because for
Machello and the others, the
consequences of their decadence always
arrive at dawn. The price too is often
borne by the most innocent characters in
the film. And Marello, chasened by his
lover's despair, comes so close to
swearing off the sweet life that is
slowly poisoning him until the next
night arrives and its temptation and
he's inevitably called back. Because the
second night is probably the sequence
everybody remembers from this film. The
international actress and sex pot of the
time Anita Ecberg plays the
international actress and sex pot Sylvia
arriving by plane to a rapturous crowd
and immediately tiring out all the
journalists except our dogged reporter
Marello by climbing the steps inside the
dome of St. Peter's Cathedral. Here they
have another shockingly unsacred
encounter. Marchello almost stealing a
kiss from the superstar before she is
distracted by yet another entertaining
event. She dances wildly at a nightclub,
seemingly set up in the ruins of the
baths of Caracella, managing to be
decadent both in ancient and modern Rome
at the same time. She quickly tires of
her husband, a drunken superstar
himself, and Marello whisks her away. It
seems like our playboy is about to
strike it lucky again and live out his
dreams. But no. Sylvia moves through the
world with a childlike impulsiveness.
Firstly demanding Machello bring her
food. Then milk for a kitten she's found
on the streets. Then abandoning the
kitten she loves so passionately a
minute ago. And finally dancing in the
Trevy Fountain in that iconic scene.
They kiss, but then the spell is broken.
Sylvia is taken back to her hotel and
Marello earns a beating for his trouble.
Once again, at dawn come the
consequences. Now, night three is
something completely different, but no
less shocking. Marello and his fianceé
drive to the outskirts of Rome to cover
a miracle. The Madonna has been cited by
two innocent children appearing to them
near a tree. But the scene has devolved
into a media circus with dozens of
lights and scaffolds and cameras set up
by journalists and camera crews
directing the scene and a crowd of
thousands hopeful to catch a glimpse of
the sacred, including lots of sick and
injured people desperate for a miracle.
The children arrive, but nothing
appears. And as the crowd gets wilder
and wilder, the children panic, pointing
out the Virgin Mary over here and over
there and everywhere. The cynical
Marello is disgusted. The crowd strips
the tree of every branch and leaf for
sacred relics, killing it in the
process, and then trampling a small
innocent child. On the fourth night of
the film, we get a visit from Marello's
father, who wants to have a good old
time at the Chaa Club. He wants to
flirt. He wants to drink. He tries to
recapture his youth with a woman Marello
seems to know intimately, but his heart
gives out. He flees on the next train
home in the unflinching light of dawn,
leaving Marello once again alone with
the consequences of his chosen life. On
the fifth night, at a Roman castle full
of bored aristocrats, Marello reunites
with Mad Delena, who confesses her mad
love for him before pretty much
immediately abandoning him for someone
else of her own class. He's then seduced
by another aristocrat during a seance.
At dawn, they all trudge down to the
chapel, and the noble family leaves to
atone, but not Marello. The sixth
episode of the film centers on the
murder suicide of Marello's intellectual
friend, Steiner. An utter tragedy.
Marello helps the police and he
volunteers to tell Steiner's wife, who
has no clue any of this has happened.
But they'reounded by the paparazzi in a
heartbreaking scene. And Machello,
seemingly sickened beyond measure by
this decadent lifestyle and the harsh
realities that it either exploits or it
covers over, quits. And in the last
evening of the film, an older Marello
returns as a publicist. This time, drunk
and bored. At a house party, someone
strips to celebrate their divorce. The
party turns nasty and they're kicked
out. Instead, they wander a nearby beach
at dawn where the fishermen haul a
monster in from the sea. Marello
collapses on the shore, bored and
perhaps doomed. He sees a small ray of
hope, a young girl further along the
beach who talked to him during a brief
interlude in the film and had a genuine
moment of happiness with her. She tries
to talk to him again too and perhaps
rescue him, but he cannot hear her. She
smiles and the film ends. So, let's
first talk about the society that
Lulchce Vita portrays because you may
not have failed to notice that while we
follow one protagonist through a series
of episodes, we're given almost a survey
of Italian society as it stood in 1958.
We see the newly rich and wealthy
writing an industrial and luxury goods
boom that was unleashed in Italy after
the Second World War. Or more
accurately, we see their husbands and
their various mistresses at nightclubs,
restaurants, and the hotspots of Rome.
What the sopranos would call their
gumars, if you like. We also see the old
money and the aristocrats mixing in or
alternately staying at home and
entertaining on a grand scale in their
ballrooms and their ruins. We see the
new international intelligencia. When we
go to Steiner's house, it's full of
poets and musicians and countless
pretentious artists who tell us it's
better to burn than to freeze, whatever
that means. We see the poor and the
faithful when they congregate for a
miracle on the outskirts of Rome. And we
briefly see the underbelly of Roman
society during Marello and Magdalena's
outing with a prostitute. Critically, we
see the crowd of the Via Venetto, a
famous Hollywood-like street in the
center of Rome. We see the movie stars,
the producers, and the hangers on. And
these are all people who seem to live in
the very evenings and the dreams of all
of the other classes in the film when
they imagine glamour. It's an image of
what the sweet life really is. And this
is why the film was so scandalous
because in each episode of the film, we
see a particular class's form of the
sweet life. And Fellini also
unflinchingly shows us the suffering and
the exploitation on which that sweet
life is built. Usually not their own,
but sometimes it is, as Marello and
Magdalena seem to be suffering pretty
badly in their gilded cages.
We also see inevitably that this sweet
life bought at such a high price is
extremely fragile. Indeed, it melts away
every morning as the sun comes up. And
the consequences have to be dealt with.
And the partygoers with their must hair
and their torn gowns who look like real
fools have to mingle amongst the workers
who are turning up to do their jobs. I
don't even think that this is a
particularly Marxist point that Fellini
is trying to make. He was never a
Marxist or a communist even though the
party thrived in Italy at the time.
Rather, he came from a poor fishing
village on the coast and he was utterly
scandalized by the lives that Hollywood
on the Tyber as it was then called
allowed these people to lead. And
Italian society, the world really, was
equally scandalized by the portrait of
them that Fellini drew. He was asked
about it a few months after the film
premiered and he said,
In fact,
comfort.
Now, it might be a cliche to say that
the film held a mirror up to society,
but here it really does because Fellini
built the script of the film obsessively
out of scandalous articles in the
tabloid newspapers because the flying
Jesus being helicoptered to the Vatican,
that happened. A bronze statue of Christ
the worker was delivered to St. Peter's
Square in Vatican City via helicopter in
1950 and it was the first time an
aircraft had ever landed at St. Peters.
Anita Ekberg's wild dance in the baths
of Caracella happened. Although it
actually happened in a nightclub and
with a naked strip tease, it was so
scandalous and so heavily photographed
that it led to arrests, films being
confiscated, and a trial. All of Italy
was outraged by it. The children seeing
the Madonna, the subsequent media circus
and the strip tree actually happened
too. And the iconic scene of Anita Eberg
dancing in the Trevy Fountain was
actually based on an event that happened
a few months before when an
international star danced one night in
the Trevy Fountain. And that
international star was, yep, you guessed
it, Anita Ecberg. Apparently, she was
only too happy to reenact the scene for
Fellini's film. So many of the events in
the film actually happened which was
dangerous because it kind of stripped
Italian society of the one accusation it
could make against Fellini to defend
itself that he made it up that he was a
fabulist and that these things could
never truly happen in their Italy. But
the even more bitter accusation and
really the core of the film is that the
society of the time let them happen. In
fact, it was happy either to participate
in them or to turn a blind eye. When
asked about the scandal, one French
journalist remarked,
Foreign
speech. Foreign speech. Foreign speech.
prayer
because things were going pretty well
for certain groups in Italy. The country
was being internationally celebrated.
Indeed, it was setting the tone through
Italian culture and fashion and film.
After a devastating war, the big guys
like the US and the UK were finally
paying attention to Italy. Although the
majority of Italian society may not have
liked or supported Mussolini,
particularly towards the end, after the
war, he ironically achieved one of his
main objectives, elevating Italian
culture back to the worldleading place
it held under the Roman Empire. Indeed,
even the studio where Leolce Vita was
filmed, Chinichia or the cinema city was
founded by Mussolini. So the
aristocrats, the politicians, the
bourgeoa, the oligarchs, and even the
church were a little uncomfortable at
Fellini pointing out that all of the
contradictions and hypocrisies they had
to ignore to keep this party going. Just
as Marello towards the end of the film
can no longer keep ignoring everything
that must be the case in order to make
this hollow spectacle possible. And
Fellini was a particularly difficult
messenger to take it from too because he
had already built a highly successful
career as a neo-realist cinema director
documenting the impoverished but noble
life that everyday people of Italy's
regions lived and worked and loved and
suffered. The intelligencia and the
bourgeoa in particular loved the highly
realistic yet moving portrayals that
Fellini put together of the noble
savages, the common masses that they
might sometimes pass on the street. One
of those films, Ivitali or the boys, the
guys even acts as a kind of prequel to
Lulchce Vita with the sensitive young
Marelike character leaving home at the
end of the film to seek adventure in
Rome. But the privilege didn't like it
so much when Fellini turned that neo
realalism on them to document their very
real experiences. As the Italian author
Alberto Moravia says in an interview,
And here's where the philosophy starts
to come in. Because for a class that
implicitly casts themselves as
enlightened or is more knowledgeable or
smarter than those they rule over,
indeed that is often their justification
for ruling. It stings to have pointed
out that they can be just as illogical
and irrational as the rest of us. And
Lulchce Vita particularly stings because
it also points out that while the ruling
classes may be particularly comfortable,
they're not particularly happy. Quite
the opposite. And this is the brilliant
political and philosophical reversal
that is at the heart of Lulchce Vita.
Why it is both a shockingly political
and philosophical film. It inverts the
near realism, which is a form of cinema
that often comforts its intellectual
audience because it's not farmers and
laborers who are going to go and see
films about themselves. It's the
eggheheads and the intellectuals like
me. And we see how unhappy these working
classes are in these neo-realist films.
And we perhaps even unconsciously say to
ourselves, "Oh, the poor fellows. They
don't even know what's good for
themselves. Thank goodness we're in
charge. We'll look after them." Well,
Fellini turns that neo-realism the other
way around and shows a ruling class
that, wouldn't you know it, doesn't know
what's good for themselves either. On
how the movie was received and the
scandal it caused, Fellini said, quote,
"What I intended to show was the state
of Rome's soul, a way of being a people.
What it became was a scandalous report,
a fresco of a street and a society. The
left-wing press played it up as headline
reportage on Rome. But it didn't have to
be Rome. It could have been Bangkok or a
thousand other cities. I intended it as
a report on Sodom and Gomorrah, a trip
into anguish and despair. I intended for
it to be a document, not a documentary.
You might also wonder, what impact did
the scandal have on the street and the
society it documented, particularly
given that the film is clearly based on
events that actually happened despite
claiming not to be, and that they
rebuilt an almost exact copy of that
famous street in Rome to film it. Well,
one of the famous paparazzi who worked
the street, a word incidentally, this
film invented, one of those paparazzi
said, "Someone makes a bitter film and
what happens? He increases tourism for a
little while at least." Because the
truth is that all of this post-war
prosperity and excess was about to
collapse. What followed the events that
Leolce Vita exposed was the Vietnam War,
civil unrest, and the worldwide student
protests of May 1968, as well as the
profound recessions and crises of the
1970s that were soon to come. One of the
great ironies of Lulchce Vita is that
the spectacle that it documented was
soon to disappear in no small part due
to the condemnation and the political
outcry that the film actually stirred
up. Although I say just the spectacle
because as we know the inequality that
created the spectacle still endures
today, it has just found so many more
ways to become subtle and unseen. But
perhaps this also explains the enduring
force of the social and philosophical
critique found within Lulchcevita. But
let's get to the philosophers because a
class is made up of individuals like
Marello and Magdalena and the whole
kaleidoscope of the upper class
characters that parade through the film.
How did they find themselves in that
guilded prison? An existence of complete
comfort but little happiness. Well, this
is where we need to talk about the
philosophies of hedonism and the
aesthetic experience which literally are
philosophies of the sweet life if you
like. Because hedonism is a very old
philosophy hailing all the way back to
the ancient Greeks and it literally
means pleasure in Greek. In short, it's
a philosophy of enjoying yourself to the
utmost. But the ancient Greeks disagreed
on which approach to pleasure and to
life would give you the most enjoyment.
One school, the Sereniacs, believed the
more pleasure, the better, and that the
pleasure you experience now is much
better than merely just remembering or
hearing about pleasure. So they thought
that you are justified in living every
moment to the fullest and ditching any
moment or person or task that causes you
pain and boredom. Then there were the
Epicurans who were a little more
balanced in their approach. They still
thought that pleasure was a virtue and
the ultimate point, but they also
thought that you couldn't spend your
life stuffing your face. You'd
eventually be sick. Instead, they
cleverly argued that there is overall a
greater pleasure and happiness to be had
in taking everything in moderation and
in avoiding harm. So, theirs is a more
refined and balanced pleasure. You can
still enjoy the finer things in life,
but you have to cultivate them and pace
yourself. And in the various episodes of
Lulchce Vita, we see both ways of living
in action. We see how the wild sireniac
abandon of the Hollywood stars throwing
crazy parties and running from one
entertainment to the next. But this
impulsive out of control way of living
quickly turns bitter and causes
wreckage. Marello lives it for one night
with Sylvia but greets the dawn doubled
over on the pavement and beaten down. We
also see the more refined approach to
pleasure, the Epicurian approach in the
intellectual party where everyone drinks
a little, they talk a little, they joke
a little, they listen to some music. It
is beautiful for a time, but as we
discover, the attendees are equally
bored of its hollow entertainments.
Marello also revisits this refined
hedonism again at the aristocratic
castle, but the second time it seems
even more hollow. He has an enjoyable
enough time, even a sexual assignation,
but the dawn comes and the family
trudges to church. The highs of this
epicurionism are never quite high enough
to compensate for, you know, the
hangover in the morning. Indeed, Fellini
seems to condemn both approaches to
lives full of pleasure, whether in
moderation or not. He condemns them both
because they are always built by the
sweat of some other person's brows. the
poor servants, the deliverymen, the
waiters, the street sweepers, the people
who have to clear away the detritus in
the morning. But also because, as we've
seen, the partygoers are equally bored
by the spectacle and eventually sickened
by it. But they seem to lack enough
imagination to escape it, to do
something less sensual and more
dependent on the moment with their
lives. Which brings us to the Danish
philosopher Saurin Kyukore who lived a
short unhappy but profound life from
1813 to 1855. He was destined to become
a priest to marry to live a solid
bourgeoa life. But through his studies
he found philosophy and he came to
despise what he saw as the hedonistic
complacency of his society. He broke off
his studies and engagements and he wrote
a series of philosophical and literary
works that blew a hole in the ideas of
his time. So much so that he's now
recognized as the grandfather of
existentialism. And I'm telling you
Kiokagore had he been around could have
written Lulchce Vita in one of his most
famous books either or. He even
references that favorite Fellini-esque
figure the clown. While condemning the
spectacle and complacency of his upper
class society, he wrote, "A fire broke
out backstage in a theater, the clown
came out to warn the public. They
thought it was a joke and applauded." He
repeated it. The acclaim was even
greater. I think that's just how the
world comes to an end to general
applause from wits who believe it's a
joke. And not just how the world ends. I
hear the Galactic Republic ends that
way, too. But it's a scene straight out
of a Fellini film. And Kiyokugore
thought of himself as that wise fool,
the one who comes to tell everyone that
they're living a life of meaninglessness
and regret, but going unheard. And
critically for us, Kiyok posited that
there are three stages of life or types
of existence that we can inhabit. These
are the aesthetic, the ethical, and the
religious. And the latter two we won't
go into too much detail about, but you
may be familiar with them. The ethical
is the good life. Following the rules,
thinking of others, never quite being
free, but having the certainty and the
dignity of knowing that you are doing
the right thing. Certainty being the key
word in this ethical existence.
Kyokugo's contention in later works,
however, is that eventually you're going
to come unstuck. You're going to come to
a tough and uncertain situation where
there is no right ethical answer. This
Kiagore thinks pushes you into the
religious existence and not organized
religion but its exact opposite one full
of uncertainty where your conscience
calls to you to do something but you're
not entirely sure what or whether the
action that you settle on is the right
thing to do. You simply take a leap of
faith and find out. So the ethical and
the religious are two modes of being
which feature heavily in Kyokugor's
later work. But the mode of being that
interests us the most because it seems
to go to the core of Lulchce Vita is the
aesthetic existence that is the life of
pleasure. And much of Kyokugor's either
or documents this existence including
his infamous diary of a seducer and
Kiagore thinks that the literary
character emblematic of the aesthetic
life is Mozart's playboy bad boy Don
Gioani. Donioani he lives for the chase
whether it be wine, women or song. and
the consequences be damned. Don Giovani
is so confirmed in his impulsive and
pleasure-asing ways that at the end of
the opera he descends into hell because
of it. He truly was a Kardashian of his
time. So Don Giovani the athlete the
hedenist is an iconic character because
he's condemned to pinball from one
sensuous episode to the next just like
Marello does in Lulchce Vita. And just
like Marello, Don Giovani is
periodically confronted with the
holiness of the spectacle that is his
life, his purely aesthetic existence. He
feels the chilling hand of something,
maybe the ghost of the commendator or of
dread or of despair. And Kiokagore
writes that this dread chases Don
Giovani throughout his life. It is the
shade that darkens almost every moment,
driving him to try to experience things
even more vividly and intensely. to
drown this out because he knows that
every enjoyment will turn sour and
disappear just like Marello facing up to
all of those dawns and that simply
existing in a life of pleasure doesn't
give meaning or a ladder to grasp onto
or an escape hatch. Instead, the athlete
is left alone with themselves again and
again pursuing a life that can only
bring pleasure and happiness to them and
nobody else. And a lot of the time it
even fails at that. This is Marello's
dilemma. The dread that is pulled up
from the depths of the sea and which
confronts him in that last dawn of the
film. For Kyokugore, what the individual
living the aesthetic life fears most is
boredom. So the hedenist's choice is to
either be amused to death or to live in
boredom. There's no escape. Kiyokugor
writes that when we live purely in this
mode quote what wonder then that the
world is regressing that evil is gaining
ground more and more since boredom is on
the increase and boredom is a root of
all evil it's the inability to confront
boredom that drives the spectacles and
the distraction that form the episodes
of lulce vita and dare I say it but it
is the fear of boredom that often drives
us today and leads to some quite
horrible consequences basically
everything to do with our phones and our
isolation and social media and what this
has done to our communities. It's
Kyokugor's subversive claim in either or
that boredom or rather the aesthetic
life sphere of it that has become the
root of all evil. It links a 19th
century Danish philosopher a film about
a street in Rome in 1958 and our lives
today. Kyugor even says in either or and
I quote yet what was it that staged the
fall of Rome? It was pannis and
cersences bread and circuses the
spectacle of celebrity and the sweet
life. Fellini exposed it to the shock of
his generation and we're still in the
thr of it today. Which leads us to our
last philosophical point, nihilism.
Because what Kyokugore was diagnosing in
an individual and in a society in the
grip of mere spectacle was nihilism. Now
nihilism is a philosophy that claims all
values are subjective. that there is no
truth and that everything is
meaningless. It's frequently and
controversially associated with the
philosopher Friedrich Ner as if he was
kind of advocating for this approach to
the world. But like Kyokugore and
Fellini, nature doesn't like and embrace
nihilism. Quite the opposite. He
diagnoses it as the condition of a
society and of the world after the
collapse of many of the grand narratives
that used to give life meaning. And
Nietze and Kyokugore and Fellini tell us
why. Because if we embrace the aesthetic
existence and only the aesthetic
existence, then we live by the moment
and by the surface. But we also know
that the moment never lasts and that
everything changes so quickly like a
star who demands milk for a kitten but
then is nowhere to be found and then is
off splashing in another fountain. So if
nothing lasts and can hold our
attention, then it's impossible to build
a narrative of our lives and ourselves
which just become a series of moments or
to discern a purpose in this narrative.
It also becomes impossible to believe in
things bigger than ourselves because our
aesthetic experience relentlessly tells
us that nothing lasts. You know, it's
not for nothing that Fellini's stunning
film is set amongst so many great ruins.
Such an existence breeds a nihilistic
approach to the world. The nihilism that
nature kiugore and fellini diagnose
generations apart. And it's the despair
of that nihilism that meaningless that
causes Marello to sink to his knees on
the beach. But is there an escape why
yes there is. Thanks for asking. In
either or even Kyokugore asks us to
quote simply recall that it is through
sin that one first catches sight of
salvation and famously in response to
the scandalized reception that Lulchce
Vita received Fellini wrote an article
called quote I too am a sinner and
nature thought that there was the
possibility of escape too but his
approach was controversial. It was his
will to power. The attempt for the
individual to pull themselves up by
their bootstraps out of the muck to make
themselves into something, something
they wanted and they wield rather than
just accepting whatever is offered at
the buffet of life. Now, there's a
certain type of perhaps young, perhaps
male, perhaps message board posting
individual who's quite partial to this
worldview. For me, it's complicated, but
it is something. It is a potential
ladder out. Kyokugor's escape route is
even less helpful to be honest. It's the
teological suspension of the ethical. A
great philosophical term you can use to
bamboozle all of your friends at the
parties they won't invite you to. But
what it means is a religious calling and
not in the conventional or even
spiritual way, but rather an experience
that is so inexplicable and yet
passionately real that it drives you to
do something important despite the
uncertainties. And for Kiyoka, the whole
point is the risk and the uncertainty.
Therefore, the faith that you must have
to make that leap. But for Fellini in
Lulchce Vita, a way out comes from a
much simpler place. It's PA, the girl he
meets at the beachside tavern and then
runs into again at the end of the film.
She represents a simpler life, one away
from the spectacle. She enjoys what she
has. She enjoys the seasons, the beach,
and the fact that these fishermen have
just pulled a crazy creature from the
sea. In a film full of characters
disconnected from each other, she seems
to be the only one who has a connection
to both the real world and to other
people. Fellini's implicit message here,
at least in my reading, is that the
sweet life of privilege leaves us away
from what is real and what matters. Our
work loses meaning because we haven't
had to choose meaningful work. If
Marello doesn't write his gossip column
for tomorrow's tabloids, it really
doesn't matter, which means he doesn't
matter, which means nobody depends on
him. And he's created a series of
friendships united only by spectacle, by
the parties he attends. Instead of
spending time with and appreciating the
woman who actually loves him, those who
he's become attached to drift in and out
of his life. And again, no one depends
on him. Meaning, again, he doesn't
matter to them and to himself. Because
again, at the root of nihilism and
meaninglessness is boredom. It is often
boring to do meaningful work that
accomplishes something. It's often
boring to help people and have them
depend on us. It's often boring to meet
up with and listen to family and friends
who tell us the same stories and have
the same dull lives as us. If we live
the aesthetic existence, we flee from
that potential boredom. Because just
like Marello, we're often terrible at
telling what is good for ourselves.
Paula gesturing to Marello on the beach
offers for him to join her to escape.
But in an ironic parallel of the opening
scene in the film where Marello rode the
flying Jesus, he cannot hear her.
[Applause]
The question Fellini asks his audience
both then and now is can we hear her? So
that is Lulce Vita a bitter shocking
beautiful philosophical film. It was
Roger Eert's favorite film. Although he
said that when he would see it again at
different stages of his life he would
identify with very different parts of
it. When he was young, he loved the
glamour and he envied the parties. When
he was middle-aged and sick of
Hollywood, he identified with Paul
Machello's condition. And when he was
older, he loved the moments of humanity
amidst the bitterness. The characters we
briefly glimpsed, like the prostitute, a
clown, a girl growing into womanhood and
working at a seaside cafe. They nod
backwards at the rustic redeeming
narratives that Fellini was previously
known for. But these are fleeting
glimpses. The center of the film filling
every frame is the spectacle and the new
age of capitalism embodied in Rome, in
Italy, and in the world. Personally, I
don't love this film. Sorry. It's
spectacular and absolutely worth
watching. Don't get me wrong. It has
some of the greatest cinematography
outside of an Orson Wells or an Andre
Tarovski film, but it's just a little
too bitter for me. Particularly the
Steiner episode. It speaks of a phase in
life when you've had enough. But I
genuinely don't believe that we can
spend all of our lives within that
aesthetic existence. We all get sick of
it and we all grow up eventually, even
if some do a little more quickly than
others. The disillusionment of Lulchce
Vita is a right of passage and well
worth documenting, but it passes. The
film I love instead is Fellini's next
film, Eight and a Half, which is a story
of how Marello and Fellini resurrect
themselves. How they rise from the
burntout husks of their Hollywood on the
Tyber existence and start taking joy in
being able to be artists again. But
that's for another video. And I'll
always be grateful to Lulchce Vita
because it also inspired one of my
favorite films of all time, The Great
Beauty by Paulo Serantino, made 55 years
later. It's a kind of response to
Fellini's Lulchce Vita and it provides
the flip side of the argument. It just
quickly centers on a journalist facing
down the end of his own life and his
career, reflecting with his friends and
deciding, hey, it's been a blast. It's
been pretty great, hasn't it? And he
realizes that the thing he's been
missing for the entirety of life that
he's always yearned for has kind of
secretly accompanied him the entire
time. But that is for a completely
different episode of Philosophical Film
Club. For now, that's it. So until next
time, be wise and be kind and try not to
dance in too many fountains.
[Music]
[Applause]